+++
title = "Test design"
date = 2019-05-21
+++
<h2 id="test-cases">Test cases</h2><ul><li><strong>Test analysis</strong> is the process of looking at something that can be used to derive test information</li><li>A <strong>test condition </strong>is an item or event of a component or system that could be verified by one or more test cases (eg. a function, transaction, feature, quality attribute, or structural element)</li><li>The <strong>test basis</strong> are all documents from which the requirements of a component or system can be inferred or: documentation on which the test cases are based</li><li>If we have a requirements specification, the table of contents can be our initial list of test conditions. In practice the subset we select may be a very small subset and yet it has to have a high probability of finding most of the defects in a system. We need some intelligent thought processes to guide our selection; <strong>test techniques</strong> are such thought processes</li><li>A <strong>test case </strong>is a set of input values, execution preconditions, expected results and execution postconditions, developed for a particular objective or test condition</li><li><strong>Test conditions</strong> should be able to be linked back to their sources in the test basis, it should see where given requirements are tested - this is called <strong>traceability. </strong>These requirements go from agile (modern) to low tech (high maintenance) solutions like a spreadsheet</li><li>Tests can be based on static techniques, specifications, structures and experience of the tester</li><li>Test design includes <strong>oracle: </strong>“Software that applies a pass/fail criterion to a program execution is called a (test) oracle”.</li></ul><p><br></p><h2 id="dynamic-test-design-techniques">Dynamic test design techniques</h2><ul><li><a href="https://cshub.nl/post/498641362" target="_blank">Specification based</a> (black box)</li><li><a href="https://cshub.nl/post/354694478" target="_blank">Structure based</a> (white box)</li><li>Experience based</li></ul><p><br></p><h2 id="experience-based">Experience based</h2><ul><li><strong>Error guessing</strong>: error guessing is a technique that should always be used as a complement to other more formal techniques. It guesses where defects are most likely to lurk.</li><li><strong>Exploratory testing: </strong>a hands-on approach in which testers are involved in minimum planning and maximum test execution. The test design and test execution activities are performed in parallel typically without formally documenting the test conditions, test cases or test scripts. The more the tester knows about the product and different test methods, the better the testing will be.</li></ul>